When five agents are racing, which one needs you right now? Status can't tell you that — a process can be alive and still stuck waiting. That's what activity is for.
Status is the lifecycle of the process. Activity is the live semantic state — what the agent is doing this second, classified from its terminal output on every snapshot.
There are four. Working, in blue — thinking, editing, or running a command. Blocked, in orange — stopped at a prompt, waiting on you. Done, in green — it printed a completion marker, ready for review. And idle, in gray — started but not yet showing a recognizable signal.
This is the one that matters most. Blocked, orange, means 'this agent needs me.' On a board of five, that chip is how you find the one to attend to instead of scanning five terminals.
Open it and there's the prompt waiting — a yes-or-no, a menu, a password. Answer it, and watch the chip flip back to working.
Back to working. You unblocked it in seconds because the chip told you exactly where to look.
How does it know? It's a pure classifier over recent output — it strips the color codes, lowercases the text, and matches substring markers against the last few lines.
The precedence is deliberate. Blocked is checked first, in a tight window of the last few lines, so an old prompt scrolled up in history doesn't read as a live one. Then done, then working over a slightly wider window.
Markers are things like a yes-slash-no, 'press enter', or a prompt caret for blocked; a checkmark or 'done' for done; 'thinking' or 'compiling' for working. If nothing matches, the previous state just stays.
An agent can also self-report its own state over the control surface — and when it does, that's authoritative, because the agent knows itself better than any classifier. More on that later in the series.
That's the fleet made legible. Next: reviewing what these agents actually produced.
Beyond the fan-out board, Asylum bundles the workaday surfaces you expect from an IDE — plus one that's unique to an ADE. Start with the terminal.
This is a real terminal, powered by the same engine that renders each running agent's live pane. Every run's agent runs in one of these.
And you can split it — divide a pane and work in two shells at once. Watch a build in one split while you poke around in the other.
While a run is live its pane streams output. After the process exits, Asylum keeps the persisted transcript, so you can still read what happened — even though live terminals don't survive an app restart, their captured output does.
The Editor is a code editor with a file tree for navigating a worktree — quick manual tweaks without leaving the ADE.
Its behavior lives in settings under the editor key — font family, font size, tab width, and autosave. Because they're in settings, they reload the moment you save.
Flip autosave on and it writes changes as you go. Change the font size and it updates live.
Preview renders files richly instead of as raw text. Markdown becomes formatted HTML.
It classifies the file and shows it appropriately — images displayed, PDFs shown as documents, text as text, and unknown or binary files labeled as such, so you're not staring at garbage characters.
The Browser is an embedded web view — handy for a local dev server, docs, or a deployed preview. But its standout feature exists specifically to feed visual context to an agent: design mode.
Toggle design mode on. Now the page is annotatable.
Click an element. Asylum captures that element's HTML, its CSS, and a selector that identifies it — the real markup and styles, not your description of them.
Attach a note to the capture — 'make this button match the primary style,' 'this heading is misaligned on mobile.'
Each annotated element gets a numbered pin badge, so you can see and manage what you've marked. Do a few.
Then send the batch to an agent. All your captures and their notes are gathered into one prompt and handed to a run. Preview shares the same design surface, so you can annotate rendered content the same way.
Instead of describing a UI bug in words, you point at the exact element. Next up: taking everything to the command line.